# Open Grant Proposal

- **Project Name:** XP.network VM Hub.
- **Team Name:** XP.network.
- **Payment Address:** .

## Project Overview

### Overview

XP.network is a coddless platform for building NFT based applications for different blockchains, Polkadot, Diem and several other. The platform will allow artists, photographers and other non developers build their NFT marketplaces, galleries, museums, etc. without coding.

In order to synchronize communication between different parachains we want to elaborate our own protocol implemented in a network of pallets. At the moment Polkadot’s Relay Chain allows connectionless callbacks. It is hard to trace whether an incoming message is related to any previous transaction or request. Therefore, we will elaborate a protocol that will enable such tracking. It will be a number of pallets, each acting like a “post office” from a post office network. They will all use our XP Relay Chain protocol.

Since different blockchains may use different smart contract languages, we are aspiring to create an automated toolbox that will communicate via the Polkadot Relay Chain and will generate in the target pallet a valid code in Move, Solidity and Rust (Ink!) which could be further validated and compiled to byte-code to interact with the target blockchains. After the target blockchain has finished or rejected the transaction, the information about this is packed back into the reply XP Relay Chain protocol message and is sent back to the requesting pallet for passing it to the requesting blockchain.

Because there's no NFT library in Move's standard library we will have to write it as part of this project. This will allow a. other blockchains to call NFT smart contracts in Move, 2. run NFT smart contracts in other languages from Move.

#### Integration

All the NFT based applications built by our platform will be using the XP Relay Chain protocol we're aspiring to elaborate.

Connection to Polkadot will be implemented via a VM Hub Layer Substrate pallets. The pallets (one for each parahcain / parathread) will act as a “post office network” supporting the protocol that enables nodes to keep track of the “topics”. They will also "translate" the intentions of one parachain regardless of its smart contract language to a smart contract in the language of the target parachain / parathread.

### Project Details

**XP Relay Chain Protocol** will be supported by a number of pallets, each acting as a “post office”. The protocol will include:
```terminal
{
ID: id, required to identify that the other blockchain’s reply is related to this request,
Callback_Function: a designated Polkadot Relay Chain callback function,
Callback_Arguments: required for the above function,
To: indicates the destination parachain / parathread,
Function: what function should be called in the target pallet,
Arguments: [ ], a list of argument for the above pallet function
}
```
Every pallet will know how to read such incoming messages. If the message is related to the blockchain this pallet is attached to it will do the following:
1. Deserialize the incoming message from bytecode to optcode,
2. Transform the commands and arguments from the optcode to a smart contract in the target language, used by the blockchain it works for.
3. It will pass the generated bytecode to the blockchain for execution.
4. Once there is a reply from the blockchain, the reply will be packed into the return message of the present protocol and sent back to the requesting pallet via 5. Polkadot Relay Chain callbacks with the same id it got the request.
6. The pallet which initiated the transaction will receive the reply and will match the id of the reply with the id of the request.
7. It will deserialize the bytecode of the reply and will transform it to the bytecode of its smart contract language (should it be different from the counterpart’s).

A pallet implementing this protocol consists of:

1. **Bytecode Deserializer** - it receives binary input and returns a human readable opcode. 
2. **Assembly Code Converter** - it  creates the following key - value pairs:
   + The chosen smart contract programming language.
   + Template number.
   + Data to populate the smart contract with.
3. **Bytecode Compiler** - it takes the key - value pairs generated at the previous stage as an input and generates the chosen smart contract language bytecode as its output.
4. **Polkadot parathread** - it uses the Relay Chain callback mechanism to communicate with the other parachains and parathreads using XP Network protocol.

A set of pre-programmed audited code templates are ready to be populated by the arbitrary data. Once a request is received, the templates are populated with the incoming data and are instantly compiled into transaction ready bytecode. Initially there will be a limited set of ready code templates for each platform. However, new templates will be added on a permanent regular basis. Eventually most possible use cases will be available for each bridged platform. Finally, the original smart contract bytecode will be translated directly into the target language bytecode, removing all limitations.

#### [PoC](https://github.com/xp-network/xp-compiler)

Before applying for the grant we have prepared GitHub repositories with the Proof of Concept.

Since the idea behind the VM Hub is converting one smart contract language bytecode to another we have elaborated the following steps:

1. We wrote a short smart contract in Solidity.
2. We compiled it to bytecode with the solc compiler.
3. We deserialized the bytecode into opcode.
4. An array of opcodes became a bytecode template:
   a. Commands (MSTORE, SSTORE, CALLVALUE, ISZERO, JUMPI, REVERT… )
   b. Data (PUSH 80, PUSH [$] 000000000000000000000000000000000000000001, etc.)
5. We wrote a request in Move which will specify which template we want to use and will provide the data to populate the template with new data.
6. The code in Move is then compiled to bytecode & passed to our Substrate pallet.
7. The pallet deserializes the Move bytecode and extracts the instruction - which template to use and the data to populate it with.
8. The data from the request is used to populate the opcode parameters in the template.
9. The template is reassembled to bytecode.
10. The new data from the request in Move is used to populate the human readable smart contract in Solidity.
11. The new smart contract is compiled into bytecode with the native solc compiler.
12. We run the two bytecodes in the Ethereum testnet.
13. If both the smart contracts run in the testnet and produce the same result - the concept is proved.

The above process is automated and can be reproduced on any machine.

#### Expected obstacles:
For efficiency in EVM higher order bits of types narrower than 256 bits, e.g. uint24 may be ignored or cleaned shortly before writing them to memory or before comparisons. This means, before comparison or saving higher order bits must be “manually” cleaned.

In the Move language the code is divided into scripts and Modules. When scripts are compiled to the bytecode they become straightforward opcodes, however, modules can be recursively called from the scripts or from the other modules. Thus, modules deserialisation is much more complex and also requires recursiveness to retrieve the content of all the functions or data stored in different parts of the stack.


#### Further development
We cannot get rid of the target language dependency, however, the source language can be abstracted to an API protocol able to call predefined smart contracts in supported languages (Move, Solidity and Rust) from other programming languages. This may initially seem to be a limitation, but the number of actually used smart contracts is not infinite. If all or nearly all known smart contract patterns are present in the template library it will give more freedoms than limitations.

We’re planning to elaborate the most popular smart contract bytecode templates in 3 languages: Move, Solidity and Rust and write APIs for compiling and sending the resulting bytecodes to the supported blockchains (see the list above).

The smart contract templates are a temporary solution. Eventually we will add the flexibility to directly translate smart contracts from one language to another without predefined templates.

### Ecosystem Fit

- The VM Hub will eventually develop to become programming language independent and will enable yet nonexistent languages to seamlessly integrate with the established blockchains via Polkadot.

## Team

### Team members

- Dmitry Brook - CTO, Project Lead.
- Virbal Kint - Expert in Move, Rust & Co-Founder

### Contact

- **Contact Name:** Dmitry Briukhanov

- **Contact Email:** dima@xp.network.com

- [XP.network website](https://xp.network.com)

### Legal Structure

- **Registered Address:** HaHAgana, 15, Or Yehuda, Israel
- **Registered Legal Entity:** XP Network

### Team Experience

**Dmitry Briukhanov**

- Over 18 years of experience in Development and Management 
- Former Senior Software Developer in Best Systems, Israel
- Former Team Lead in NLK, Russia

**Verbal Kint**

- Over 5 years of experiences in Blockchain Development 8 years in Rust, 1 year in Move and 15 years of development experience overall


### Team Code Repos (PoC)
[XP.network repo](https://github.com/xp-network/)

[Move Compiler](https://github.com/xp-network/move-compiler)

[Solidity Compiler](https://github.com/xp-network/solidity-compiler)

[EVM to Assembler](https://github.com/xp-network/evm-asm)

[VM Hub Pallet](https://github.com/xp-network/vm_hub_pallet)

[XP Compiler](https://github.com/xp-network/xp-compiler)


### Team LinkedIn Profiles

[Dmitry Bryukhanov](https://www.linkedin.com/in/dmitry-briukhanov-60b2ab45/)

## Development Roadmap

### Overview

- **Total Estimated Duration:** 6 months.
- **Total Effort:** 240 days.
- **Total Costs:** 8.79 Ether

### Milestone 1 - VM Hub pallet Move Code to Solidity bytecode (MVP)

- **Estimated Duration:** 20 working days (1 month)
- Working days **x** ppl. **:** 20 **x** 2
- Effort: 40 days
- **Costs:** 1.46 Ether

| Number | Deliverable | Specification |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 0. | Documentation | Documents containing product architecture as well as usage manuals  |
| 1. | Bytecode deserialiser | Developing the Move and Solidity bytecode deserializers to opcode |
| 2. | Assembler parser | Developing opcode parser for Move and generating “intentions” |
| 3. | Intentions callers | Writing functions to be called with the “intentions” Move - Solidity | 
| 4. | Bytecode compiler | Development of the Solidity opcode mapper to bytecode | 
| 5. | Testing in Solidity Testnet| Running the generated bytecode in Ethereum testnet | 


### Milestone 2 — VM Hub pallet Solidity Code to Move bytecode

- **Estimated Duration:** 34 working days (1.5 months)
- Working days **x** ppl. **:** 34 **x** 2
- Effort: 68 days
- **Costs:** 2.49 Ether

| Number | Deliverable | Specification |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 0. | Assembler Parser | Developing the parser for the Solidity opcode |
| 1. | Intentions callers | Writing functions to be called with the “intentions” Solidity - Move | 
| 2. | Bytecode compiler | Development of the Move opcode mapper to Move bytecode |
| 4. | Move NFT Libraries | Development of NFT libraries in Move |
| 5. | Protocol development | Development of XP Relay Chain Protocol |
| 6. | Testing in Westend | Testing the message protocol between two pallets (Move & Solidity) messaging protocol | 
| 7. | Testing in Diem Testnet| Running the generated Move bytecode in the Diem testnet | 

### Milestone 3 — VM Hub pallet Move Code & Solidity bytecode to Rust bytecode

- **Estimated Duration:** 33 working days (1.5 months)
- Working days **x** ppl. **:** 33 **x** 2
- Effort: 66 days
- **Costs:** 2.42 Ether

| Number | Deliverable | Specification |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 1. | Bytecode deserialiser | Developing the Rust bytecode deserializer to assembler |
| 2. | Assembler parser | Developing opcode parser for Rust and generating “intentions” |
| 3. | Intentions callers | Writing functions to be called with the “intentions” Move, Solidity - Rust and vice versa | 
| 4. | Bytecode compiler | Development of the Rust opcode mapper to bytecode | 
| 5. | Testing Polkadot Westnet| Running the generated from the messaging protocol bytecode in Polkadot Westnet | 

### Milestone 4 — Smart Contract templates in Move, Solidity, Rust, testing and launch

- **Estimated Duration:** 33 working days (1.5 months)
- Working days **x** ppl. **:** 33 **x** 2
- Effort: 66 days
- **Costs:** 2.42 Ether

| Number | Deliverable | Specification |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| 0. | Smart Contract templates | Writing optcode smart contract templates for known use cases in Move, Solidity, Rust |
| 1. | Integrating with Polkadot | Testing the PA in live Polkadot environment |
| 2. | Compliance Validator | Adding automated test for the above integrated modules |
| 3. | Documentation | Writing and publishing final documentation with all the amendments |
| 4. | Tutorials | Preparing and publishing tutorials with examples and exercises | 
| 5. | Product Launch | Publishing the XP Network VM Hub for public use |

## Future Plans

**Community Plan**

Hiring 3-5 more developers

Joining Polkadot related events

Publishing articles in Telegram, medium.com and other channels


**Development Plan**

The template bytecode chunks will become more atomic to add flexibility to the bytecode compilation process.

Eventually, we hope to enable our pallet to become completely dynamic, being able to process yet unseen non predefined smart contract patterns and convert them into valid bytecodes of a chosen smart contract language.

Writing pallets with the XP Relay Chain protocols for the languages other than Solidity, Move and Rust.

Development of bridges to the Avalanche, Binance, Cardano, Diem? (should regulations allow), Elrond, Heco and Solana blockchains.

## Additional Information

[The project repo:](https://github.com/xp-network)
